So far this year markets have endured a slew of hurdles-from inflation worries, to rising rates, and now recent turmoil in the banking sector. Despite the wild ride, there are still names that may be worth a look according to Jonathan Boyar, President of Boyar Research. Boyar noted excitement over Topgolf Callaway Brands (MODG) as a viable stock pick. He noted the company buying 86% of Topgolf it didn't already own, makes the stock “a growth story at a value price…about 50% of their EBITA in 2023 will be Topgolf, and there's lots of room for expansion." Overall, Boyar said his picks are “outside the mainstream because I think that's the way investors will be able to make money over the next 3-5 years" For more of Jonathan Boyar’s stock picks watch the full interview here with Yahoo Finance’s Rachelle Akuffo. Key video moments:00:00:08 Picking stocks outside the mainstream 00:00:15 Topgolf Callaway Brands stock pickKohl's (NYSE: KSS) saw its stock price surge on Thursday, jumping 5.7% as of 11:50 a.m. ET. It had been up as much as 10.2% during morning trading. The major indexes were all up on Thursday, as the S&P 500 had gained 16 points (0.4%), the Dow Jones Industrial Average was up 27 points (0.1%), and the Nasdaq Composite had risen 77 points (0.7%) as of 11:50 a.m. ET.Wall Street's main indexes climbed on Thursday as fears of a banking crisis eased, with rate-sensitive real estate and technology stocks leading gains ahead of key inflation data that could shape the Federal Reserve's policy path. Investors await the February reading of personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index, the Fed's preferred inflation gauge, due on Friday after January figures showed a sharp acceleration in consumer spending. Data on Thursday showed jobless claims last week rose more than expected from the week before indicating a cooling labor market, while fourth-quarter GDP growth was slightly lower at 2.6% compared with earlier estimates of 2.7%, both supporting the case for a softer Fed policy.