A bipartisan group of U.S. senators introduced a bill on Thursday aimed at cutting Google and Facebook's clout in online advertising, an early sign that lawmakers will press on with efforts to rein in Big Tech in the new congress. The bill would prohibit big digital advertising companies, with Google the biggest, from owning more than one part of the stack of services that connect advertisers with companies with space for advertisements.TORONTO — Jeremy Kinnear is 23 and already thinking about home ownership. Fresh out of university, the Edmontonian is in the midst of a four-year job program that will require him to move to Calgary halfway through. After that, he hopes to put down roots. So when Kinnear got a call from his broker earlier this year about the new Tax-Free First Home Savings Account (FHSA), he was excited about taking advantage of the program. "I'm pretty young, so I've been saving as much as I can right now. I neWASHINGTON (AP) — Weeks after the failure of two banks, President Joe Biden called Thursday for independent regulatory agencies to impose tighter rules on the financial system, telling them that they can act under current law without additional steps taken by Congress. The recommended changes outlined by the White House try to put a clear blame on the Trump administration for weakening supervision of regional banks, issuing a fact sheet that said Biden’s predecessor “weakened many important commThe reductions are part of Disney's previously announced plan to cut 7,000 positions as it seeks to control costs and become a more streamlined operation. ABC News President Kim Godwin announced the downsizing and restructuring in a memo to staff that was seen by Reuters.(Bloomberg) -- House Republicans are finalizing a bill combining an increase in the US debt ceiling with spending cuts, energy deregulation and other GOP priorities, Speaker Kevin McCarthy told reporters Thursday.Most Read from Bloomberg$52 Billion Chipmaking Plan Is Racing Toward FailureNew Yorkers Are Moving to These Three Florida Cities$335,000 Pay for ‘AI Whisperer’ Jobs Appears in Red-Hot MarketUS Air Force Plans to End Lockheed Hypersonic Weapon ProgramRussia Detains US Journalist for TwoTORONTO — The publisher of the Toronto Star is calling on Canadian companies to dedicate at least 20 per cent of their advertising budgets to local media. Jordan Bitove made the request Thursday at a Canadian Club luncheon in Toronto, where he said convincing local companies to dedicate their ad spending within Canada is crucial because tech giants who link to articles published by his papers and others are “basically stealing the great work that our team does.” “The advertising revenue that oncTwo U.S. Army Black Hawk medical evacuation helicopters crashed during training Wednesday night in Kentucky, killing nine soldiers. Here are questions and answers about Black Hawks: WHAT IS THE BLACK HAWK? The Black Hawk is a twin-engine, four-bladed, medium-lift, utility helicopter developed for the U.S. Army since the 1970s by Sikorsky Aircraft of Stratford, Connecticut. It typically has a crew of two pilots and two crew chiefs. Its basic Army designation is H-60; export versions are designateNEW YORK (AP) — Stocks are rising Thursday, keeping Wall Street’s main measure of health on track for a winning month, as a bit more fear evaporates from markets. The S&P 500 was 0.4% higher in late trading. It pared an earlier, bigger gain, but it’s still on pace for a fifth up day in the last six. It’s been on a turnaround after struggling in earlier weeks on worries about whether the banking system was cracking under the weight of higher interest rates. The Dow Jones Industrial Average was up