Upcoming Mission EventsNASA's first Earth Venture Instrument mission, TEMPO will measure the pollution over North America, from Mexico City to the Canadian oil sands, and from the Atlantic to the Pacific, hourly and at high spatial resolution. TEMPO will be the first space-based instrument to monitor air pollutants hourly across the North American continent during daytime.Date: April 3, 2023 - 11:00 a.m. EasternMission:
Artemis II Crew AnnouncementDescription:NASA and CSA (Canadian Space Agency) will announce the four astronauts who will venture around the Moon on the Artemis II mission. Traveling aboard NASA’s Orion spacecraft during Artemis II, the mission is the first crewed flight test on the agency’s path to establishing a long-term scientific and human presence on the lunar surface.The Crew Flight Test will demonstrate the ability of Starliner and the United Launch Alliance’s Atlas V rocket to safely carry astronauts to and from the International Space Station. Following a successful test flight with astronauts, NASA will begin the final process of certifying the Starliner spacecraft and systems for regular crew rotation flights to the space station.No Earlier Than: May 4, 2023Mission:
Astrobotic Commercial Lunar Payload ServicesDescription:A suite of robotic NASA payloads will be sent to the lunar surface as part of a Commercial Lunar Payload Services delivery, in this case by Astrobotic Technology of Pittsburgh. Landing will take place in the following weeks.Date: Early May 2023Mission:
Axiom Mission-2 LaunchDescription:Axiom Space’s Director of Human Spaceflight and former NASA astronaut Peggy Whitson will command the privately funded mission. John Shoffner of Knoxville, Tennessee, will serve as pilot. The two mission specialists, Ali Alqarni and Rayyanah Barnawi from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA), are members of the inaugural Saudi national astronaut program. They are flying through an arrangement between KSA and Axiom Space. Once docked, the private astronauts plan to spend 10 days aboard the orbiting laboratory implementing a full mission of science, outreach, and commercial activities.Date: 2023Mission:
XRISMDescription:The X-ray Imaging and Spectroscopy Mission (XRISM), is a collaborative mission between the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency and NASA, with participation by ESA, to investigate celestial X-ray objects with high-resolution spectroscopy and high-throughput imaging.Date: 2023Mission:
QuesstDescription:The first flight of the Quesst quiet supersonic aircraft will take place out of Lockheed flight facilities in Palmdale, California. The Quesst mission has two goals: 1) design and build NASA's X-59 research aircraft with technology that reduces the loudness of a sonic boom to a gentle thump to people on the ground; and 2) fly the X-59 over select U.S. communities to gather data on human responses to the sound generated during supersonic flight and deliver that data set to U.S. and international regulators.The first flight of NASA's X-57, a small, experimental airplane powered by electricity. All-electric technology will make flying cleaner, quieter, and more sustainable. The flight will take place at NASA's Armstrong Flight Research Center in California.Date: June 2023Mission:
Intuitive Machines Commercial Payload Lunar ServicesDescription:A suite of robotic NASA payloads will be sent to the lunar surface as part of a Commercial Lunar Payload Services delivery, in this case by Intuitive Machines of Houston. Landing will take place in the following weeks.Date: July 2023Mission:
EUCLIDDescription:Euclid, a European Space Agency (ESA) mission with contributions from NASA, is designed to explore the composition and evolution of the dark universe. The spacecraft will launch on a SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket from Cape Canaveral.Date: September 24, 2023Mission:
OSIRIS-REx delivers sample of asteroid Bennu to EarthDescription:A capsule containing pieces of asteroid Bennu will separate from the OSIRIS-REx spacecraft and enter Earth’s atmosphere. The capsule will parachute to the Utah Test and Training Range in Utah's West Desert.Set to launch from NASA's Kennedy Space Center in Florida, Psyche will travel across the solar system to an asteroid of the same name, which has unusually high metal content. Scientists hope understand why this is so, and to help answer fundamental questions about Earth’s own metal core and the formation of our solar system.This mission will deliver NASA’s PRIME-1 drill to the Moon’s surface as part of a Commercial Lunar Payload Services delivery. Landing takes place in the following weeks.Date: November 2023Mission:
Lunar TrailblazerDescription:Lunar Trailblazer, a mission selected under NASA’s Small Innovative Missions for Planetary Exploration (SIMPLEx) program, is a small satellite designed to provide an understanding of the form, abundance, and distribution of water on the Moon, as well as the lunar water cycle. It will launch on Intuitive Machines' CLPS flight IM-2.Suite of eight payloads – with nine science and technology instruments – delivered to the lunar South Pole of the Moon as part of a Commercial Lunar Payload Services delivery. Landing takes place in the following weeks.Date: 2023Mission:
Firefly Aerospace Commercial Lunar Payload ServicesDescription:Suite of 10 science investigations and technology demonstrations delivered to a non-polar region of the Moon’s surface as part of a Commercial Lunar Payload Services delivery. Landing takes place in the following weeks.No Earlier Than: December 2023Mission:
ASTHROSDescription:Launching from Antarctica, Astrophysics Stratospheric Telescope for High Spectral Resolution Observations at Submillimeter-wavelengths (ASTHROS) will use a balloon larger than a football field to study a phenomenon that chokes off star formation in some galaxies.Launching from Antarctica, Galactic/Extragalactic ULDB Spectroscopic Terahertz Observatory (GUSTO) will fly an Ultralong-Duration Balloon carrying a telescope with carbon, oxygen and nitrogen emission line detectors, to measure emissions from the interstellar medium, the cosmic material found between stars.Date: 2023Mission:
JUpiter ICy moons Explorer (JUICE) LaunchDescription:An ESA (European Space Agency) mission, for which NASA is providing instruments, JUICE will carry the most powerful scientific payload ever flown to the outer solar system. The mission will study Jupiter and its moons to help scientists understand how habitable worlds might emerge around gas giant planets.Date: January 2024Mission:
Plankton, Aerosol Cloud Ocean Ecosystem (PACE)Description:PACE will advance the assessment of ocean health by measuring the distribution of phytoplankton, tiny plants and algae that sustain the marine food web.Date: 2024Mission:
NISARDescription:NISAR—NASA + Indian Space Research Organization + synthetic aperture radars—is a joint mission with the Indian Space Research Organization to track subtle changes in the Earth’s surface, spot warning signs of imminent volcanic eruptions, help to monitor groundwater supplies, track the melt rate of ice sheets tied to sea level rise, and observe shifts in the distribution of vegetation around the world.