Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a mental health condition that can cause unusual levels of hyperactivity and impulsive behaviors. People with ADHD may also have trouble focusing their attention on a single task or sitting still for long periods of time.Many people experience inattention and changes in energy levels. For a person with ADHD, this happens more often and to a greater extent compared with people who do not have the condition. It can have a significant effect on their studies, work, relationships, and home life.What is executive dysfunction?Executive dysfunction is a common symptom of ADHD and refers to difficulties in cognitive functions, such as paying attention, absorbing or remembering new information, ignoring distractions, and regulating emotions and behaviors.To make ADHD diagnoses more consistent, the APA has grouped the condition into three categories, or types. These types are predominantly inattentive, predominantly hyperactivity-impulsive, and a combination of both.Predominantly inattentiveAs the name suggests, people with this type of ADHD have extreme difficulty focusing, finishing tasks, and following instructions.Experts also think that many children with the inattentive type of ADHD may not receive a proper diagnosis because they don’t tend to disrupt the classroom. Research suggests this is more common among girls with ADHD.Predominantly hyperactive-impulsive typePeople with this type of ADHD primarily show hyperactive and impulsive behavior. This can include:fidgetinginterrupting people while they’re talkingnot being able to wait their turnAlthough inattention is less of a concern with this type of ADHD, people with predominantly hyperactive-impulsive ADHD may still find it difficult to focus on tasks.Combined hyperactive-impulsive and inattentive typeThis is the most common type of ADHD. People with this combined type of ADHD display both inattentive and hyperactive symptoms. These include an inability to pay attention, a tendency toward impulsiveness, and above-average levels of activity and energy.Despite how common ADHD is, doctors and researchers still are not sure what causes the condition. It’s believed to have neurological origins. Genetics may also play a role.Research suggests that a reduction in dopamine is a factor in ADHD. Dopamine is a chemical in the brain that helps move signals from one nerve to another. It plays a role in triggering emotional responses and movements.Other research suggests a structural difference in the brain. Findings indicate that people with ADHD have less gray matter volume. Gray matter includes the brain areas that help with:If you suspect that you or your child has ADHD, talk with a doctor about getting an evaluation. For your child, you can also talk with their school counselor. Schools regularly assess children for conditions that may be affecting their educational performance.For the assessment, provide your doctor or counselor with notes and observations about your or your child’s behavior.If they suspect ADHD, they may refer you or your child to an ADHD specialist. Depending on the diagnosis, they may also suggest making an appointment with a psychiatrist or neurologist.If stimulants do not work well or cause troublesome side effects for you or your child, your doctor may suggest a nonstimulant medication. Certain nonstimulant medications work by increasing brain levels of norepinephrine.You may have heard the terms “ADD” and “ADHD” and wondered what the difference is between them.ADD, or attention deficit disorder, is an outdated term. It was previously used to describe people who have problems paying attention but are not hyperactive. The type of ADHD called “predominantly inattentive” is now used in place of ADD.According to the Anxiety & Depression Association of America, more than 60 percent of children with ADHD still show symptoms as adults. For many people, hyperactivity symptoms often decrease with age, but inattentiveness and impulsivity may continue.That said, treatment is important. Untreated ADHD in adults can have a negative impact on many aspects of life. Symptoms such as trouble managing time, forgetfulness, and impatience can cause problems at work, home, and in all types of relationships.According to the CDC, around 8.8 percent of people ages 3 to 17 years in the United States have had a diagnosis of ADHD at some point. This includes 11.7 percent of males and 5.7 percent of females.Language mattersSex and gender exist on spectrums for adults and children. This article uses the terms “male” and “female” and “boy” and girl” to refer to a person’s sex at birth, but that may not align with the person’s gender identity. Your doctor can better help you understand how your specific circumstances will translate into diagnosis, symptoms, and treatment.For children, ADHD is generally associated with problems at school. Children with ADHD often have difficulties in a controlled classroom setting.Boys are more than twice as likely as girls to receive an ADHD diagnosis. This may be because boys tend to exhibit hallmark symptoms of hyperactivity. Although some girls with ADHD may have the classic symptoms of hyperactivity, many do not.While ADHD is a neurodevelopmental disorder, it’s not considered a learning disability. However, ADHD symptoms can make it harder for you to learn. Also, it’s possible for ADHD to occur in some people who also have learning disabilities.To help relieve any effect on children learning, teachers can map out individual guidelines for a student with ADHD. This may include allowing extra time for assignments and tests or developing a personal reward system.Neurotypical vs. neurodivergentNeurotypical describes someone who processes information in ways that are typical within their culture and among their peers. On the other hand, neurodivergent describes people who process information in a different way. People with ADHD sometimes identify as neurodivergent, but ultimately it’s a personal decision.DepressionIf you or your child has ADHD, you’re more likely to have depression as well. In one study from 2020, around 50 percent of adolescents had major depression or an anxiety disorder compared with 35 percent of those who did not have ADHD. Other research suggests that up to 53.3 percent of adults with ADHD may also have depression.Though there can be added challenges in managing more than one condition, treatments are available for both conditions. In fact, the treatments often overlap. Talk therapy can help treat both conditions. Also, certain antidepressants, such as bupropion, can sometimes help ease ADHD symptoms.Conduct and behavior disordersBehavior and conduct problems are more common among children with ADHD than those without the condition. These disorders can arise when a person does not feel understood by those around them.Someone who does not feel understood may argue a lot, lose their temper, or purposely annoy others. These may be signs of oppositional defiant disorder.Some people find they cannot help breaking rules or behaving aggressively toward others, maybe fighting, bullying, or perhaps taking things that do not belong to them. This is called conduct disorder.Treatment is available for people who face these challenges. Experts recommend starting treatment early and making sure the treatment fits the needs of the person and their family.Learning disorderSome children with ADHD have a learning disorder that can make it additionally hard to carry out their study tasks. Examples include dyslexia, which makes reading difficult, or presents difficulties with numbers or writing.These challenges can make it hard for a child to cope at school. They can also worsen feelings of anxiety and depression. Getting help early is essential in trying to minimize the effect of these challenges.If you or your child has ADHD, a consistent structured schedule and regular expectations may be helpful. For adults, staying organized can be helpful. Here are some ways that can help with getting organized and maintaining it:making listskeeping a calendarsetting remindersFor children, it can be helpful to focus on writing down homework assignments and keeping everyday items like toys and backpacks in assigned spots.If you think you or your child may have ADHD, an important first step is talking with a doctor or another healthcare professional as soon as possible. They can help determine if ADHD is a factor for you or your child.If you or your child receives a confirmed ADHD diagnosis, the doctor can also help you create a treatment plan to help you manage your symptoms and live well with ADHD.How we reviewed this article:Healthline has strict sourcing guidelines and relies on peer-reviewed studies, academic research institutions, and medical associations. We avoid using tertiary references. You can learn more about how we ensure our content is accurate and current by reading our editorial policy.Chou C-C, et al. (2017). Effects of an 8-week yoga program on sustained attention and discrimination function in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5237364/