Bipolar disorder is a mental health condition marked by large shifts in mood from mania to depression. Although bipolar disorder can be challenging to manage, many effective treatments and strategies are available.Bipolar disorder isn’t a rare condition. In fact, the National Institute of Mental Health says that 2.8% of U.S. adults — or about 5 million people — have a bipolar disorder diagnosis.The condition used to be known as manic depression and bipolar disease.There are three main types of bipolar disorder: bipolar I, bipolar II, and cyclothymia.Bipolar IBipolar I is defined by the appearance of at least one manic episode. You may experience hypomanic episodes, which are less severe than manic episodes, or major depressive periods before and after the manic episode. A person can also go through a long period of stable mood before experiencing either mania or depression.This type of bipolar disorder affects people of all sexes equally.Are sex and gender the same thing?People often use the terms sex and gender interchangeably, but they have different meanings:“Sex” refers to the physical characteristics that differentiate male, female, and intersex bodies.“Gender” refers to a person’s identity and how they feel inside. Examples include man, woman, nonbinary, agender, bigender, genderfluid, pangender, and trans. A person’s gender identity may differ from the sex they were assigned at birth.Bipolar IIPeople with bipolar II experience one major depressive episode that lasts at least 2 weeks. They also have at least 1 hypomanic episode that lasts about 4 days. According to a 2017 review, this type of bipolar disorder may be more common in females.CyclothymiaThese episodes also involve symptoms that are shorter and less severe than the episodes associated with bipolar I or bipolar II disorder. Most people with this condition experience no mood symptoms for 1 to 2 months at a time.Your doctor can explain more about what kind of bipolar disorder you have when discussing your diagnosis.Some people experience distinct mood symptoms that resemble but don’t align with these three types. If that’s the case for you, you might get a diagnosis of:To receive a diagnosis of bipolar disorder, you must experience at least one period of mania or hypomania.These both involve feelings of excitement, impulsivity, and high energy, but hypomania is considered less severe than mania. Mania symptoms can affect your day-to-day life at work or home. Hypomania symptoms typically don’t cause as much disruption, but they can still be distressing.symptoms that don’t relate to another medical or mental health condition or substance useYou could also experience symptoms of psychosis or both mania and depression (known as mixed features). These symptoms can have more impact on your life. If you have them, it’s worth reaching out for professional support as soon as possible.While you don’t need to experience episodes of hypomania or depression to receive a bipolar I diagnosis, many people with bipolar I do report these symptoms.Bipolar II symptomsA diagnosis of bipolar II requires:at least one episode of hypomania that lasts 4 days or longer and involves 3 or more symptoms of hypomaniahypomania-related changes in mood and usual function that others can notice, though these may not necessarily affect your daily lifeat least one episode of major depression involving five or more key depression symptoms that have a significant impact on your day-to-day lifesymptoms that don’t relate to another medical or mental health condition or substance useBipolar II can also involve symptoms of psychosis, but only during an episode of depression. You could also experience mixed mood episodes, which means you’ll have symptoms of depression and hypomania simultaneously.With bipolar II, though, you won’t experience mania. If you have a manic episode, you’ll receive a diagnosis of bipolar I.Cyclothymia symptomsA diagnosis of cyclothymia requires:periods of hypomanic symptoms and periods of depression symptoms, off and on, over 2 years or longer (1 year for children and adolescents)symptoms that never meet the full criteria for an episode of hypomania or depressionsymptoms that are present for at least half of the 2 years and never absent for longer than 2 months at a timesymptoms that don’t relate to another medical or mental health condition or substance usesymptoms that cause significant distress and affect daily lifeFluctuating mood symptoms characterize cyclothymia. These symptoms may be less severe than those of bipolar I or II. Still, they tend to last longer, so you’ll generally have less time when you experience no symptoms.Hypomania may not have a big impact on your daily life. Depression, on the other hand, often leads to more serious distress and affects day-to-day function, even if your symptoms don’t qualify for a major depressive episode.If you do experience enough symptoms to meet the criteria for a hypomanic or depressive episode, your diagnosis will likely change to another type of bipolar disorder or major depression, depending on your symptoms.An episode of mania often involves an emotional high. You might feel excited, impulsive, euphoric, and full of energy. You might also feel jumpy or notice your thoughts seem to race. Some people also experience hallucinations and other symptoms of psychosis.Manic episodes can involve behavior that’s more impulsive than usual, often because you feel invincible or untouchable. Commonly cited examples of this kind of behavior include:But impulsiveness can also show up in plenty of other ways. Maybe you:quit your job abruptlytake off on a road trip by yourself without telling anyonemake a big investment on a whimdrive much faster than usual, well above the speed limitparticipate in extreme sports you wouldn’t ordinarily considerWhile there are many reasons why a person might engage in these behaviors, the key to mania is that these are not things you would choose to engage in periods of stable mood.Hypomania, generally associated with bipolar II disorder, involves many of the same symptoms, though they’re less severe. Unlike mania, hypomania often doesn’t lead to consequences at work, school, or in your relationships. Episodes of hypomania don’t involve psychosis. They typically won’t last as long as episodes of mania or require inpatient care.With hypomania, you might feel very productive and energized, but you may not notice other changes in your mood. People who don’t know you well may not, either. Those closest to you, however, will usually pick up on your shifting mood and energy levels.Not everyone with bipolar disorder experiences major depressive episodes, though many people do. Depending on your type of bipolar disorder, you might experience only a few symptoms of depression but not the full five needed for a major episode.It’s also worth noting that sometimes, but not always, the euphoria of mania can feel enjoyable. Once you get treatment for mania, the symptom-free mood you experience might feel more like a “down” shift, or a period of depression, than a more typical mood state.While bipolar disorder can cause a depressed mood, bipolar disorder and depression have one major difference. With bipolar disorder, you might have “up” and “down” mood states. With depression, though, your mood and emotions might remain “down” until you get treatment.Most research suggests that males and females receive bipolar disorder diagnoses roughly equally, though some studies suggest it may be more prevalent in females. However, the main symptoms of the disorder may vary, depending on the sex you were assigned at birth and your gender.Females with bipolar disorder tend to receive diagnoses later in life, often in their 20s or 30s. Sometimes, they might first notice symptoms during pregnancy or after childbirth. They’re also more likely to be diagnosed with bipolar II than bipolar I.Additionally, females living with bipolar disorder tend to experience:Females with bipolar disorder may also experience relapse more often, partly due to hormone changes related to menstruation, pregnancy, and menopause. In terms of bipolar disorder, relapse means having a mood episode after not having one for some time.Research shows that people from historically marginalized groups, particularly those of African ancestry, are frequently misdiagnosed with other conditions like schizophrenia, especially if they exhibit symptoms of psychosis.While the symptoms of bipolar disorder can vary somewhat from person to person and can depend on the type, there are clear criteria for diagnosis.Research also suggests 50-75% of people living with bipolar disorder will experience some symptoms of psychosis, but this is stable across all racial and ethnic groups.Both these factors suggest that bias may play a role in this frequent misdiagnosis.Diagnosing bipolar disorder in children is controversial, largely because children don’t always display the same bipolar disorder symptoms as adults. Their moods and behaviors may also not follow the standards doctors use to diagnose the disorder in adults.However, in the last few decades, doctors and mental health professionals have come to recognize the condition in children. A diagnosis can help children get treatment, but reaching a diagnosis may take many weeks or months. It may be worth seeking care from a professional who specializes in treating children with mental health conditions.Like adults, children with bipolar disorder experience extreme mood shifts. They can appear very happy and show signs of excitable behavior, or seem very tearful, low, and irritable.All children experience mood changes, but bipolar disorder causes distinct and noticeable mood symptoms. Mood changes are also usually more extreme than a child’s typical change in mood.Manic symptoms in childrenSymptoms of mania in children can include:acting very silly and feeling overly happytalking fast and rapidly changing subjectshaving trouble focusing or concentratingengaging in behaviors that can have harmful effectshaving a very short temper that leads quickly to outbursts of angerhaving trouble sleeping and not feeling tired after sleep lossDepressive symptoms in childrenWith bipolar disorder, symptoms of depressive episodes in children can include:moping around, acting very sad, or crying frequentlysleeping too much or too littlehaving little energy for usual activities or showing no signs of interest in anythingcomplaining about not feeling well, including having frequent headaches or stomachachesOther possible diagnosesSome of the behavior issues you notice in your child could suggest other mental health conditions, such as ADHD or depression. It’s also possible for children to have bipolar disorder with another condition.Your child’s doctor can offer more guidance and support with noting and tracking your child’s behaviors, which can help them find the right diagnosis.The correct diagnosis can play a major role in finding the most effective treatment for your child. Treatment, of course, can make a big difference in your child’s symptoms, not to mention their quality of life.Remember that many of these signs, like experimenting with substances and thinking about sex, aren’t uncommon teenage behaviors. But if they seem part of a larger pattern of shifting moods or start to affect their day-to-day life, they could be a sign of bipolar disorder or another condition.PsychoeducationPsychoeducation is a therapeutic approach centered around helping you learn about a condition and its treatment. This knowledge can go a long way toward helping you and the supportive people in your life recognize early mood symptoms and manage them more effectively.Interpersonal and social rhythm therapyInterpersonal and social rhythm therapy focuses on regulating daily habits, such as sleeping, eating, and exercising. Balancing these everyday basics could lead to fewer mood episodes and less severe symptoms.Natural remedies for bipolar disorderYou’ll always want to check with your doctor or psychiatrist before trying these remedies, though. In some cases, they could interfere with any medications you’re taking.The following herbs and supplements may help stabilize your mood and reduce symptoms of bipolar disorder when combined with medication and therapy:Omega-3: Some 2016 research suggests that taking an omega-3 supplement may help with symptoms of bipolar I. However, a 2021 study found weak support for using the supplement to treat depression symptoms in bipolar disorder.Rhodiola rosea: A 2013 review suggests this plant may help with moderate depression, so it could help treat depression associated with bipolar disorder, but this, too, has not been substantiated with newer research.S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe): SAMe is an amino acid supplement that may help ease symptoms of major depression and other mood disorders. However, it can induce mania and may interact with other medications.You should consult with a doctor before trying SAMe or any other herbal or natural remedies to help you manage your bipolar symptoms.Lifestyle changesSome studies suggest that lifestyle measures can help reduce the severity of your bipolar disorder symptoms. These can include the following:eating a balanced dietgetting at least 150 minutes of exercise a weekmanaging your weightgetting weekly counseling or therapyThat said, the improvements reported by many of these studies were not significant, indicating that lifestyle interventions alone may not be enough to manage the condition. They may work better when combined with other treatments.Once you begin to experience mood episodes, you can take steps to help reduce the severity of those episodes and lower your chances of experiencing additional mood episodes. But you can’t always prevent mood episodes entirely or keep the condition from developing in the first place.Future research may reveal more about the specific causes of bipolar disorder and give researchers more insight into potential ways of preventing the condition.Symptoms of these conditions might show up more severely depending on your mood state. Anxiety, for example, tends to happen more commonly with depression, while substance use might be more likely with mania.If you have bipolar disorder, you may also have a higher chance of developing certain medical conditions, including:If you’ve noticed symptoms of bipolar disorder, a good first step involves reaching out to a doctor or therapist as soon as possible.Similarly, if a friend or loved one has symptoms, consider encouraging them to connect with a therapist as soon as possible. It never hurts to remind them that they have your understanding and support.You may need to try a few treatments before you find one that leads to improvement. Some medications work well for some people but not others. In a similar vein, some people find CBT very helpful, while others may see little improvement.It’s always best to be open with your care team about what works and what doesn’t. If something doesn’t help or makes you feel even worse, don’t hold back from letting them know. Your mental health matters and your care team should always support you in finding the most helpful approach.A little self-compassion can go a long way, too. Remember that bipolar disorder, like any other mental health condition, didn’t happen by choice. It’s not caused by anything you did or didn’t do.It’s OK (and pretty common) to feel frustrated when treatment doesn’t seem to work. Try to have patience and treat yourself kindly as you explore new approaches.Bipolar disorder and relationshipsBipolar disorder can affect your relationships. But these effects might appear most clearly in your closest relationships, like those with family members and romantic partners.When it comes to managing a relationship while living with bipolar disorder, honesty can always help. Being open about your condition can help your partner better understand your symptoms and how they can offer support.Bipolar disorder is a lifelong condition, but that doesn’t mean it has to completely disrupt your life. While living with bipolar disorder certainly creates some challenges, sticking with your treatment plan, practicing regular self-care, and leaning on your support system can boost your overall well-being and keep symptoms to a minimum.Educating yourself and your loved ones about the condition can also have a lot of benefits. Get started with these resources:How we reviewed this article:Healthline has strict sourcing guidelines and relies on peer-reviewed studies, academic research institutions, and medical associations. We avoid using tertiary references. You can learn more about how we ensure our content is accurate and current by reading our editorial policy.